Hi, I showed in a previous video how you can use one of these uh cheap, relatively cheap and simple power rail probes here to actually uh measure the performance of a power rail that you've got in your circuit.
In this particular case, I'm viewing a 5V power rail on a Raspberry Pi powered from an external battery in here.
And this has a 2 GHz bandwidth, which is way more than my 1 gig scope here.
And uh you can see the power rail probe waveform there.
But I also compared it to a very expensive 2 ghahz active probe.
This is a agyant/ keysite jobby match for this scope.
And you can see I'm probing exactly at the same point.
And we're getting a similar performance, slightly better with the power rail uh probe.
But uh we'll go into the reasons why that's the case.
But what this video is about, I want to show you that you don't actually need a proper power rail probe to probe power rails at high bandwidth.
You can actually do it using your regular probes.
Let's go.
Now, we're not talking about doing uh noise measurement, which is what I've done a video on in the past, which is typically when you want to measure like a power rail noise, like P2 peak or RMS uh noise, you generally going to do that over a like a 20 MHz bandwidth limit.
And that's why oscilloscopes will have a 20 megahertz bandwidth limit on them.
It's for historical reasons as well, but um also that is like a standard way to measure noise.
And you can see that we can actually bandwidth limit that down to 20 meghertz.
But that is really only specific for noise measurements.
Um, but when you're actually measuring the uh actual signal fidelity of the rail, you want to see all these transients in here and you want it to be high bandwidth and super accurate because we're talking about high frequency information here.
Look at this.
We're 10 nanoseconds per division, right? these transients in here, this ringing on the power rail is hundreds of megahertz.
And that depends on the uh slooh rate of the circuit that you're trying to measure.
But even basic microcontroller stuff, you can get hundreds of megahertz.
And this of course depends upon uh which uh point of your power rail you're measuring in circuit, what sort of decoupling you've got on the rail, trace inductance, loop inductance, and depending upon where your source and your load is and the whole loop area and all that uh sort of, you know, signal fidelity stuff.
We're just measuring the 5V rail of a Raspberry Pi here, but just as just an example, but uh you could be measuring a more critical power rail in your whisbang widget.
And if we actually expand that time base out here, you can see that there's that high frequency information like that.
And there's uh also going to be lower frequency information in there as well.
And this is why when you're doing power rail probing signal fidelity, you do not want AC coupling.
You actually want to include the DC component because the AC coupling is not going to pick up all that low frequency stuff.
So you don't want to go using AC coupling.
You want DC coupling.
But therein lies the problem.
Take for example the 5V rail that we're measuring on this Raspberry Pi here.
You've got 5 Vs of DC offset because you don't want to use your AC coupling mode which removes the DC offset.
You want to include that 5 volts DC.
So that signal on your oscilloscope we're using the active probe here DC coupling only.
There's our ground.
We're at uh one volt per division.
One two three four five.
Sorry you can barely see the graticule on there but five divisions.
And there's the information that we want to measure.
Look how tiny it is in there.
So if you want to see that information, not only is it advantageous to have a like a a 12 or 14 bit oscilloscope like uh modern oscilloscopes now are 12 bits is now pretty much you know the entry level even entry level scopes have 12 bit uh performance.
12 bit ADC.
It means that you can um actually zoom in on that information better.
But there's another factor, DC offset on your oscilloscope.
Uh-huh.
So, what we do is we want to use our DC offset knob like this to get this right down.
Let's put it in the center of the screen like that.
And well, you change the vertical again.
You keep it to wind it down again.
You change the vertical.
And you see how it's off screen.
And you can see here that we can adjust the 5volt the offset the DC offset on the input of our oscilloscope to that 5 volt.
So it gets rid of uh that 5 volts DC and we adjust the offset.
It'll come in soon.
And there it is.
And then we can get it on the input like that.
But oscilloscopes are not magic.
Not all oscilloscopes are created equal.
Not all of them have the DC offset required.
In fact, the DC offset that we got here is not coming from the oscilloscope.
It's coming from this active probe.
This active probe here actually has the ability to go to if I think it can do a 12vt offset.
Let's go to 13.
See if it can do that.
Nope.
The controller is at its limit.
It can actually do plus - 12 volts offset.
But that's not the oscilloscope hardware doing that.
That is a built-in DC offset of this active probe.
and you'd want to be uh a decent because you know that's many thousands of dollars just for the probe.
And that's where something like this cheap uh PRP1 power rail pro this is only like a hundred bucks or so.
I'll put a link in down below.
It's may or may not be available yet, but it can actually adjust plus minus 24 volts which is really nice.
So if you've got a uh you know a 20 volt rail that you're trying to measure, then well this thing will do it and that multi,000 probe won't.
But if we just go to our regular oscilloscope input here and on channel one and have a look at the DC offset there, how far can we go? Well, we can wind this up and find out uh minus 1.95 volt.
We can go to plus two and it'll go nope, it's plus - 1.95 volts.
So, this whisbang super high-end 14bit one gig um HDO um 3 series oscilloscope fantastic.
But if you're measuring your power rails directly with a one one probe, which we'll get into, then you can only do 2 volts DC offset, which isn't much.
All right, so let's try a 10:1 passive probe.
So, we're going to get a 10:1 division ratio as opposed to a uh 1.3:1 that we've got with this power rail probe over here.
So, with a what you want is a lower division ratio.
The higher division ratio, if you go to a 10:1 probe like this, yes, you can get 500 megahertz of bandwidth here, no worries whatsoever.
That's good enough.
This is 2 gig, but you know, 500 meg, pretty schmick.
But if you're measuring low-level signals like we're on 50 molts per division, we've already divided that by 10.
So, uh, on the input of your scope, so you're going to increase your noise floor.
So, you know, it's a tradeoff, but hey, your scope already has these.
And I've got my low impedance uh ground clip on there as well.
And I'm just going to calibrate this sucker.
And that's a little bit off.
So, we'll just uh tweak the probe with our tongue at the right angle and get a nice square waveform there.
So, we'll just tweak that tongue at the right angle.
Ah, there we go.
Bobby Dazzler.
So, here we go.
We got the blue waveform, which is our x 10 passive probe, 500 MHz bandwidth.
And uh we've got our power rail probe again as uh the yellow one here.
I've expanded the time base out to 2 milliseconds per division because you can see uh lower frequency content like this.
And that's the sort of stuff you may not be able to see if you use uh AC coupling or it can cause a problem.
But anyway, we've got enough memory depth that we can actually zoom in and see what's going on here.
And there you go.
It does a pretty good account of itself.
And if you're wondering why the blue waveform is uh before the yellow waveform here even though I'm probing the exact same spot, well, that is a skew difference between the probes because the length of this passive probe on channel 3 here does not match the uh in the entire probe length of the power rail probe here.
So you if you really want to time cororrelate the signals correctly you have to do skew correction of your channels just to um you know look we're getting 20 nconds per division.
So there's about like you know a divi half a division or something in there um difference.
So there's about a 10 ncond uh propagation delay difference between those two cables.
But you can calibrate that out on your scope.
No worries.
But in our particular case, we're just looking for the signal fidelity here.
And look at this.
The X 10 probe gives a fantastic account for itself.
There's hardly any difference.
You could say that the power rail probe is a bit lower noise in there, but jeez, it's not much considering that you've already got those x 10 passive uh probes with your scope.
They'll of course match the bandwidth of your scope except if you've got like a 1 ghahz scope like this one.
Um, you can't get a one gigahertz passive uh probe, unfortunately.
Although, uh, Tektronics do make a 1 ghahz passive probe.
I do actually have one here.
But anyway, it's not going to be the 2 GHz bandwidth of uh, a proper power rail probe or an active probe like this one.
But if you don't have the oscilloscope bandwidth to do that, then well, you know, what's the point? You're just gilding the lily.
Um, but yeah, time stamp probe works fantastically.
No worries.
But only if your scope can actually do uh the 5V offset required and that's the important point.
But of course if you're using a 10 to one probe like this you are attenuating your signal 10 to one but that means your in this case 5V uh signal is down to 500 m volts.
So uh your scope only needs 500 molts offset in order to do that.
And I'm pretty sure almost every scope out there is capable of 500 millolts.
Um, I think everyone in the lab I've got here is.
And if you try and capture the signal without using any DC offset, I've captured it at 1vt per division and shifted it down with an 8bit oscilloscope old school like this.
Um, yeah, you can see the individual bits.
It's not much help, is it? In fact, you might think that you've got like a square wave happening on your signal there.
You don't.
But as always, there's a trap for young players.
This is the DSOXR 1200 keys site.
Nice little scope, but it's only an 8 bit jobby.
So, you don't get the same dynamic range as a 12 bit or the 14 bit scope uh that we saw before, but that's okay.
Does it have decent DC offset? So, we'll switch to channel two here.
Okay.
And then we'll uh look at the probe.
I've got the probe set to 10 to one, which I am using a 10 to one uh probe.
So, that is set correctly.
And if we actually uh change this, I don't I'll just make it quick.
Look, look.
Check out the DC offset.
You might think this thing is a champion.
It's going to go up to look at this 20 volts.
WOW.
THIS THING'S KILLER, RIGHT? NO, it's not.
It's actually only 2 volts.
If I go to the probe and I set that back to one one and then we do the same thing again, you'll see it's now only 2 volts offset.
That's its true offset voltage.
So don't be fooled by a scope thinking that it has a 20 volt offset like actually on the front end it's able to offset plus - 20 volts.
It's not.
It's only plus -2 volts.
It was fooling you by having that um by multiplying that with the x 10 indicator.
But Dave, this is a 10 to one probe.
So the 5 volts that we're feeding in here should come out of here at 500 molts.
So it should be able to offset that.
So once I apply the correct offset, you can see that that x 10 probe there matches quite well.
It's a little bit, you know, a little bit noisier, but um not too shabby.
So, we can still with the x 10 probe, we can still measure a 5volt rail because it's only 500 m volts offset due to the x 10 division, which means that our two-volt offset scope can still do it.
It's beauty.
And you've seen this in previous videos on uh probing.
I'll link it in if you haven't seen it.
This is a coaxial cable probe with a series 1K resistor in there.
And this is called a Z0 or Z N uh probe.
And it's basically a do-it-yourself gigahertz bandwidth on this depending on the coax you use.
And it's basically a a 1k uh you got to use 50 ohms on the other end on the uh oscilloscope, but you can get a high bandwidth probe for practically nothing.
It's just a bit of coax and a resistor and that's it.
So with 1k resistor and 50 ohm load, we get just over uh 20 division ratio.
I can program that in directly on this particular scope.
But uh so it's a high division ratio, but you can choose your own resistor.
It's just a uh DC loading thing.
And if you're measuring a power supply, you know, a 1k load or lower is is neither here nor there really.
And there you have it.
Look at the result.
That is my Z0 probe in uh blue there.
And it's just you can make it for a couple of bucks.
It's easy.
And once again, this is the uh power rail probe there.
So fantastic, isn't it? Look at that.
So you don't actually have to buy one of these whisbang power rail probes or one of these big whisbang active uh probes to get a high bandwidth uh like power rail probing solution.
You can just use your 10 to one uh probe.
You can't use a one one uh probe cuz I've done a video on that breaking down the issues with one one oscilloscope probes.
They got a very low bandwidth, only like 5 MHz, 10 MHz, something like that.
So, yeah, you're not going to get the bandwidth out of it, but hey, you can just roll your own uh coax here, and Bob's your uncle.
And provided you have some sort of uh divider on there that's h going to allow you um to use your DC offset voltage on the input of your oscilloscope here.
Most oscilloscopes, as you saw, like that keysite one only had two volts.
Most are going to do plus minus a couple of volts.
Some other ones do better.
But here's the interesting thing to note about DC offset on oscilloscopes.
It will change depending on the volts per division setting you're on because the front end actually has relays in there that click in different attenuators and uh amplifiers in there to give you all the different uh ranges of course.
So if I put my microphone up to this, hopefully you can hear it switch.
Listen, between 100 and 200 m volts there, there is a relay click.
So, it's actually changing the front end.
So, that's also going to potentially change your maximum uh DC offset range as well.
And there's another click between 1 and 2 volts.
So, that's going to change it as well.
So, if we go to our 100 millolts per division, you'll see that it's maxing out at plus minus 1.5 volts there.
It'll always be the same on the positive side as it is on the uh negative side.
But if we jump up to that 200 molt range, we'll find that we can actually go above that.
In fact, we can go a long way above that.
But typically when you're using measuring power rails, you're usually at low voltages.
And bingo, it goes to plus - 15 volts.
Isn't that neat? And once again, you've got to test this at that probe ratio of uh one one so that you're not uh input refer multiplying your uh range there.
And if we go up to 2 volts where it clicks again, then let's go.
Let's go.
Look at this.
We can really go up in the offset voltage to you guessed it 150 volts DC offset.
But um it's not actually offsetting it by 150 volts.
It's because there's attenuators in there that attenuate the signal before it gets to the amplifier which has the offset adjustment.
So it there's not actually 150 plus - 150 volt voltage rail on your analog to digital uh front end there.
That's not how it's uh working.
It's all working with dividers and whatnot.
this Ryold DHO 800 uh series 12 bit jobby um it the scale jumps I can hear the relay click in at 50 mill volt so that's where we'll take our offset from and on the lowest range there you can see that we're going to max out at 1 plus - 1 volt there not much but that will go up if you choose 100 molt range instead looks like 200 m volt range we should find uh yeah there we go we can go to 8 volt volt.
So not 10 but eight.
The Sigland SDS 800X series HD new 12bit jobby.
Very nice.
Plus - 8 volts.
Beautiful.
The duxiest of ducks guts.
The MX04 from Roden Schwarz.
Let's have a look.
It can go to five plus - 5 volts.
But there's not just a difference between brands.
There's actually a difference between models as well.
this uh Siglant SDS 2000XHD series, it'll actually go to plus - 16 volts.
Groovy, huh? The Royal HDO 4000, unfortunately, once again, only plus - 1 volt.
And the Royal HDO 1204, well, once again, plus minus one volt maximum there.
So, um yeah, nothing you can really do there.
That just seems to be a limitation of their uh new front end, but it's a super cheap front end.
You get the bandwidth for nicks, but plus - 1 volt is still usable.
If you use a x 10 divider probe, you can easily do your 5V rail.
You could even do a 10vt rail.
And I know it's going to be the same.
The MH98 1 ghahz bandwidth for practically nothing.
Um, and yeah, it's only uh one volt as well.
But of course, like you can go to there's a relay click.
You can go up to 100 millolts.
If you do that, you're going to go all the way with LBJ right up to 10 volts and you're still down at, you know, 100 millolts per division, which is pretty decent.
So, you know, it's good enough for Australia.
Now, if you're very keen eyed, you would have noticed a big difference between both the uh key K keysite and Roden Schwarz and the Ryols and the Siglants.
So, the two bigname ones versus the two uh like lesser name ones.
There's actually a big difference.
Let me show you.
You'll notice as I move the trace down, I'm adding that DC offset, okay, in the front end, but it's showing up as positive.
It's showing up as plus voltage.
And the further I go down, the more it goes positive.
It doesn't display negative.
It's only if I move it up like that does it go negative.
But look at the sigant here.
As I go down, it's increasing, but it's showing up as a negative voltage there.
So both the siglet and the ryol show negative when you go like in the down direction, whereas both Ksite and Ron Schwarz show it as a positive.
Isn't that interesting what's going on there? It's really, it depends how you think of it whether or not it's like input referred um so to speak, which means that okay, I've got to shift my waveform down by 5 volts.
In that case, Siglett and Ryel saying, well, I've got to add add negative voltage, negative like 5 volts in there.
Whereas the keysite and the rodent schwarz show that well I've got to offset it by 5 volts.
I it doesn't think about adding the negative kind of thing.
So I don't know which one's right, which one's wrong.
Eh, six of one, half dozen the other.
Leave your thoughts in the comments.
Who's got it right? So I hope you found that video interesting.
how to probe a high bandwidth uh power rail on your circuit because you may want to do this for all sorts of uh reasons, you know, signal fidelity uh stuff, things like that, decoupling, um all sorts of, you know, ground system issues and stuff like that, you often need high bandwidth probing of your power supply.
And you can do it pretty cheap and simple just using your X 10 probe, good enough for Australia.
a cheap and simple uh coax zero probe with a series resistor.
No worries.
Um most oscilloscopes are going to have with an input divider.
They're going to have enough um DC offset range to do that.
Although something like this uh power rail probe at like a 100 bucks, you know, really good value.
It can do up to plus - 24 volts um offset.
And uh you saw this active probe, even though this is a couple of thousand, it can do like uh you know, plusus 20 volts offset.
So, you do get the higher offset uh advantage there, but you know, using your basic um probes that you already have, no worries.
Anyway, if you like that video, please give it a big thumbs up.
As always, discuss down below, and you can support the EEV blog by going to the EEvlog.store, buying a multimeter or something.
Catch you next time.